---
title: creativity, communication and coding
publish: true
layout: post
---

There's a thin tightrope you walk everytime you work on a software project that
has more than a few people involved. If you're on a team of more than a handful
of developers, you know that being able to clearly communicate your ideas and
understand other teammate's ideas is really important to the success of your
project. You start a project, and it may be just you and one other person. As
the project grows in importance, and gains more visibility in the company, more
developers get added to the project. Your calendar starts to fill up with meeting
requests, most of your working hours disappearing into the dark void of the
conference room. You're finding the urge to just slap your headphones on and crank
out some code looming large in your head. 

But this is a modern software project you're working on, right? You're not
writing code in your basement just for you; you're writing it for a real
business. This isn't just code that you'll have to deal with, this is code that
will impact every other person that you work with. It's not just about you dude.

So where is the balance? I've been thinking about this a lot lately. A talented
software developer is someone craft beautiful code, and also communicate
effectively. We work in integrated environments that demand this of us. We know
that spending all day in meetings is toxic to our creativity, but on the other
end of the spectrum, we know that coding in a walled off garden only leads to
problems on any team project. How much of a software project is spent in
communication and collaboration, and how much is spent flying solo?  What
proportion of each will yield the best results, and make for the happiest
developers? Where does creativity blossom in this continuum?

It might be easy to push to the edges, there's one thing that reaches into both
of these platitudes.

**Fear**

As a developer, when you get the fear, you might do one of two things:

** Fear and meetings

Fear breeds meetings. When we don't know how to execute or where to proceed
next, what we often do? Hold a meeting. It's crippling to not know what's next
on the path. When we're dealing with uncertainty and a dimly lit plan, some
people find reassurance in other people on the team. We don't like to not know
what's going on, and so holding a meeting can feel like the right course of
action, but meetings are almost always the most unproductive way to resolve the
fear. Do you really want to break up your entire teams workflow because you need
reassurance about a new feature? Incidentally, this is usually the course of
action that a manager will run for. When there's uncertainty and ambiguity in
the project, it's oftentimes really easy to find yourself stuck in too many
meetings.

** Fear and flying solo

To other developers, fear breeds hiding. If you're stuck on a tough problem,
sometimes it's easy to wall yourself off. I've done this one many times. Too
embarassed to speak up and admit that I need help, I might waste half a day
spinning my wheels on a problem that could have been solved in two minutes if I
had humbled myself and been willing to ask a teamate for help. It's that little
voice in the back of my head saying, "They'll laugh at you if you admit you
don't know the answer." This is not a good mindset to be writing code in. You're
already stuck in a strange state of doubt, and your code is going to reflect
these insecurities.

 If the goal is to maximize creativity while working on a team, here's what you
 must keep in mind.

** Small teams are almost always better

Software is a highly leveragable entity. It's not about how many lines can be
written, but how elegant and clean the solutions are. If it was just a matter of
writing more lines of code, there'd be no problem with throwing 100's of
developers at it. The same goes with communication overhead. The more people we
add to the project, the more the webs of communication start to get tangled.
Having a small team that can move quickly and be well-coordinated and in-sync is
almost always more effecient than a team of many. This will help with the
meetings, and with everyone feeling more often on the same page as everyone else
(because communication is easier), less fear creeps into the picture. Less
meetings, more productivity, more happiness.

** Trust goes a long way

An effective team absolutley must be able to rely on its members. This means
that I need to know that I'm not going to get ridiculed by another teammate when
asking for help. This means that I know my teammates are doing their best to get
the work done, and I don't need to call more meetings to give status updates
because I'm unclear about their progress. This is the knowledge that I can count
on a teammate to fix a problem and not just dirty the water for everyone else.

When these two rules are well established, the balance of communication often
finds itself. This is when teams start to move fast. This is when creativity
abounds.

