---
title: from revision one to revision done
published: true
layout: post
---

About a year ago, I was working on a personal coding project. It was nothing
major - I wasn't building a new operating system or writing the next cutting
edge web framework in the hottest new programming language, but it was something
that was important to me. It was a simple web app that would help me with train
times on my daily commute. I remember after working on it for several weeks and
one night getting so frustrated with it that I wanted to just rm -rf the whole
thing and wash my hands of it. It wasn't that I was stuck on any specific
problem, but that I didn't feel the quality of my code was living up to my own
expectations for myself. I had built this image in my mind that my code was
terrible and that it was unfixable without throwing the whole thing away and
starting over.

There was a lot of insecurity there. There are so many other open source
projects that I was following, and watching all the amazing commits pouring in
each day was starting to make me depressed. Here were all these programmers all
over the world who were finding a way to be productive and contribute and write
beautiful code each day, and I was stuck with my silly little programs that were
not elegant, or beautiful, or really admired at all by any of my other peers.

On a daily basis, I would check the commits that were coming in to the rails
repository on github, following the comments, reading through the commits and
trying to keep track of all the changes that were happening. It was enough to
make me pretty pissed off. Why couldn't my code look like that?

It was in this moment that a realization came to me. Maybe it wasn't that my
code was bad, maybe it's that it just hadn't had enough time to fully grow into
what it was supposed to be. Maybe I hadn't given it enough time to mature and
evolve and become the good code I had hoped for. Could it be that I just haven't
given my code enough of a chance? Should I cut myself some slack and just keep
putting in the work to make it better? Maybe I won't have to delete it after
all.  Could it be possible that other software projects go through this same
phase of adolecence and immaturity that my code is in right now? These questions
comfronted me quite forcefully.

So I checked out a copy of the Rails git history. And then I checked out
revision 1 of the code, and I started poking around. You should really do this
sometime. Find an open source project that you really admire. Maybe you admire
it because of the clean code, or the program's utility in your life, or because
it's been a tool that you've been able to build upon to make other great things.
Think of the project that seems so great and bold that it appears nearly
'unreachable' in your mind. I'm talking about the kind of project that makes you
think "I could never write something as cool as that". And then check out
revision 1. And then study it.

More than likely you'll find that this project that you've put on such a high
pedestal, started out just like the very project that you've been toiling with
on your own. It started as a breath of an idea, that took shape as something
simple and useful. The other guy writing the code probably felt the same
insecurities you're feeling right now. Over time, given enough work and care and
the chance to evolve, it blossomed into something great. It becomes a great
narrative that probably started as something crappy, and slowly transformed into
something large and grand and wonderful. This is what I found when I looked at
the first revisions of the Rails code. It took a long time for it to turn into
the often over-hyped phenomenon that it is today.

Don't think that your code has to be an instant success. Don't think that it has
to be instantly a magnificent piece of art. Every day, put in the work to make
it incrementally better. With enough time and care, the small idea that's taking
shape inside your head and inside your computer will become something bigger
than you had ever imagined when you first started on it.

