---
title: on programming and finding mental rest
layout: post
published: true
---

There's something about working inside of your head all day that's quite
dangerous. A programmer's mind is a place that's in a constant struggle to bring
organization to a chaotic stew of information. You spend all day sifting through
your thoughts and the thoughts of others to try to glue together solutions to
today's tough problems. If you develop software for a living, you'll spend more
than half of your waking life trying to distill concise and simple business
rules from long and messy conversations, or trying to dig deep into code that's
complicated, confusing and not as well tested as you thought it was. At the end
of the day, your job is to bring order to chaos, to take all the jumbled mess of
ideas that whirl around your organization and build something clear, coherent
and well-structured.

So here you are, daily lassoing the ideas that are running in your head and
trying to temper them into something that feels tangible and real. You're
building something that's taking shape inside of your mind, but will never
really exist in true physical form in the real world. You're working one level
detached from the senses of experience: you can't touch a program, nor can you
smell it or taste it. If you wanted to pick up a program and hold it against
your face you'd probably start to look funny rubbing your cheek against your
laptop screen. Even when you see a program, what you are seeing is only
something represented on a glowing screen. Instead of building things that exist
in the real world like roads and buildings, you're building virtual roads and
buildings that only exist through the expression of an idea. You're hammering
ideas into logical structure, rather than hammering a nail into a 2 by 4. 

It's not easy to spend all day inside your head. Your mind is often a much
scarier place than you ever really imagined. We're a mess of emotions and
stresses and relationships and conflict and loss and pain and fear. We're not
creatures who can exist purely on logic, and yet so often that is the type of
thinking that programming rewards.

In spite of this, I have come to realize that the software developers I look up
to the most are the ones who are able to get outside of their heads. They are
the ones who find ways to instill all the aspects of humanity including logic
and reasoning into their work. They are the ones who can approach the keyboard
each day as a well-rounded person who can see all the components that go into
building great software, and that means not just the code that's on the screen.

Last weekend, my wife and I were just waking up on a Sunday and the first thing
I started telling her was about some new software project that I had been
thinking about recently. I think she knew I had been thinking about it a lot
because I started to talk really fast and my eyes started to get really big and
I started to twirl my hair while I was telling her about it. She was groggy,
just waking up, but the way she looked at me made it clear that she was still
listening. When I got done telling her about this idea, she just smiled, patted
me on the head and said, "Oh honey, don't you ever just want to give your mind a
break? I think it needs to rest sometimes."

My wife is amazing at listening to my crazy new ideas and being really
encouraging, but she had a really good point. When do I ever really get to slow
down? When do I make the intentional effort to give my mind the healthy break it
deserves? A successful programmer is one who's moving faster, learning more, and
coming up with more and more ideas, but how can we ever expect the good ideas to
come if we cannot give our minds the space to relax? A good programmer is also
one who can operate comfortably at higher and higher levels of abstraction, but
how can we appreciate those levels of abstraction if we're so far removed from
the here and the now?

I've seen what happens when these things are ignored, and it's not pretty.
Stress, anxiety and decreased levels of overall happiness soon follow the
developer who doesn't learn to get outside their head. Creativity drops, code
quality decreases, and the pleasure of creating something starts to taper off.

Maybe getting outside of your head means something simple like exercise or a
sport or hobby that requires some body movement and exercise. Maybe it means
volunteering to help people by doing 'menial labor' that's well below your pay
grade. Whatever your physical outlet is, I encourage you to be intentional about
pursuing it. Your success as a programmer means having a clear head that is
given ample rest. Creativity and pleasure can only flow from a person who is
well balanced and knows when it's time to hit the mental accelerator, and when
it's time to hit the breaks.

