---
title: clean code creates opportunity
published: false
layout: post
---

![Vision](/images/vision.jpeg)

Why is it that good programmers love clean code? Why do we spend so much time
talking about it, writing about it, trying to make our dirty code more like it?

We like TDD because it gives us feedback about our code. It's our way as
programmers to have the code constantly talking back to us. TDD is about trying
to keep our brain and the computer in sync. This is how the machine talks back,
and if we listen and take action, our systems will be better for it. It's easier
to see all the parts of a system when all the parts are clearly communicating.

The same can be said about clean and dirty code. If you're working with clean
code, the system seeps into your brain easily. If you can understand and see
what the code is telling you, then your mind is free to shape and mold it more
easil. If you can understand the design, you become the ruler and master of that
design. On the other hand, if you're working with dirty code, you're going to
spend a lot more effort cramming the system design into your head. The code will
stop speaking to you the way you want it too. You'll stop hearing the orchestra
play in harmony and instead only be able to listen to the baby crying next to
you in the audience.

It's significantly harder to build something great without starting with the
right first step. A complex system will start to turn on itself if the gears and
levers that keep it functioning smoothly don't stay in their proper places. This
doesn't just apply to software: If you're a chef, it's hard to create a 7 course
meal when the sink is stacked to the ceiling with dirty dishes. All the pieces
have to be cleaned and put in their correct place before you can begin the
really important work.

Clean code creates opportunity. Clean code creates vision; the ability to
perceive and know what action must be taken next. Clean code creates a vacuum
that your brain is able to imagine filled. When you're working with dirty code,
all you see is mold and decay and dark alleys. The code will stop pointing you
to the scenic pastures and will instead sink you into a dark bog. If you can't
do the work to make your code clean, I fear you will be unable to see the vision
of where the code ought to lead. Clean code will not create innovation,
clean code will simply create the opportunity for innovation.

What new discoveries are in your codebase? Are the ideas burried below mounds
and mounds of caked mud, or are your ideas floating on the surface of a pond of
shimmering water?

