---
title: the end of productivity
published: true
layout: post
---

I'm done with productivity. I'm done using a word from an industrial age that
doesn't speak for the work I do. I'm done beating myself up over not cranking
out more without thinking about the work I'm doing.

Do you read a lot of productivity blogs? They're easy title bait for me. Titles
like, "10 easy steps to do your best work", or how about, "7 things you can do
to get more work done". It's masturbation, plain and simple. Why do I chase
after this stuff?  Why do these types of blog posts seem so appealing? Why do I
take the title bait every time?

As developers, it's easy to see our happiness with our work being tied to "what
we get done". When I come home from work, and I knocked out a lot of features
or bug fixes, I feel good about myself. I felt more "productive".  I got a lot
done, so I feel good about myself.

But there's something that's missing. That good feeling doesn't last as long as
I want it to. I start to tell my wife about my day, and after I've talked about
it, my excitement starts to come down a bit. There's something temporary about
that 'productivity high'. There's a deeper desire inside my heart, another
layer to the onion.

What I really want is to feel like what I'm working on is making a difference.
I want to feel like the work I do makes an impact on others, that I'm building
something that's pushing the envelope, doing something new and exciting
- that I'm moving the baton farther down the road.

Let me unpack this a little bit more with a question. Let's say you're tasked
with two different features. One job is a straightforward feature that involves
something simple like some CRUD features to an existing data model. It's
straightforward, you know how it's done, you can do it quickly and effectively.
In fact, you're so good at this feature that you know you can get 10 features
like this done in one day. Wow, 10 new features in one day, that's some high
productivity.  The other feature involves a newer technology. You haven't used
it before, there's more unknown, and you don't know exactly how you're going to
solve the problem.  Maybe this feature is going to take months to complete.
Which one is going to bring you more *long term* satisfaction?

Cranking out the same stuff as we did yesterday might feel good in the short
term. Maybe we feel really productive, but the long term joy is found somewhere
else. It's found in creating something you didn't even know you were capable of
creating. It might be difficult in the moment. You might not feel the
short-term highs of productivity from cranking out tons and tons of
code, but it has the potential to be life changing in the long run.

I want to throw away the word productivity. It doesn't apply to the work I want
to do. I'm not on an assembly line worker, trying to crank out more widgets. I
have to keep reminding myself about this. It's easy to fall into the elusive
trap of the productivity snare. It's easy to feel like just being 'productive'
is what it's all about. We need to think more for the long term. We need to
stop obsessing about who has more github repos, or who's committed to more open
source projects and start thinking about contributing to *one* project that's
going to change a lot of lives. The measuring stick of productivity isn't
what's going to make an impact on the world. It's not going to make your life
in the long term feel like something valuable.

Build something lasting. Make something that counts. You might feel the
pressures of productivity all around you, especially since raw productivity is
easier to measure than lasting impact. The productivity trap is only going to
keep you spinning in the same place. Please, make a difference in the lives of
others, make a difference in your own life. Throw away the productivity,
embrace real impact.

